# BPC_Pesticides

<img
    src="https://www.cascobayestuary.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/logo_sm.jpg"
    style="position:absolute;top:10px;right:50px;" />

Analysis of data from 2014 and 2015 Maine Board of Pesticides Control marine 
sediment and water sampling for selected pesticides.

# Introduction
In 2014 and 2015, Maine's Board of Pesticides Control (BPC) conducted three
marine sampling programs, as part of an effort to address growing concern that
certain pesticides may pose a significant hazard to Maine's lobster fishery.
Crustaceans retain many of the same biochemical traits as insects.  It is widely
recognized that many insecticides can be lethal to crustaceans at fairly low
ambient concentrations.

Due to a couple of reports from other states (later questioned), concern about
impacts to lobster centered around the potential for a specific group of
pesticides, the synthetic pyrethroids, to harm lobsters.  After some
consideration of likely pathways of exposure, the BPC's "Environmental Risks
Advisory Committee" or ERAC decided the most likely scenario for direct impacts
to lobster would be in near shore environments, especially those that sheltered
juvenile lobster. BPC's marine sampling program therefore emphasized:

1. Collection of synoptic data on presence of about eighty pesticides in
   freshwater inflows to marine environments ("stormwater" sampling) and
   
2. Gathering data on presence of a suite of (principally) pyrethroid pesticides
   from samples of intertidal muds.
   
In 2015, most sediment samples collected were collected along the shores of
Casco Bay, along an environmental gradient from the most urbanized portions of 
the Bay's shoreline to relatively remote, island locations. The sampling 
design was intended to allow examination of the relationship between land use 
and pesticide concentrations in marine muds.

There were relatively few stormwater samples collected from within Casco Bay, so
those data are not included or analyzed here.  They are available at a
[companion GitHUb repository](https://github.com/CBEP-SoCB-Details/BPC_Pesticides.git)
that contains additional code and data.

# Statement of Purpose
CBEP is committed to the ideal of open science.  Our State of the Bay data
archives ensure the science underlying the 2020 State of the Bay report is
documented and reproducible by others. The purpose of these archives is to
release raw data and data analysis code whenever possible to allow others to
review, critique, learn from, and build upon CBEP science.

# Archive Structure
 CBEP 2020 State of the Bay data analysis repositories are divided into from two
 to four sub-folders.  All archives contain at least an "Original_Data" and a
 "Graphics" folder.  The other two folders are only included if strictly
 necessary.

- Original Data.  Original data, with a "DATA_SOURCES.md" or "READ ME.txt" file
that documents data sources.  
    **DATA IN THIS FOLDER IS AS ORIGINALLY PROVIDED OR ACCESSED.** 

- Derived Data.  Data derived from the original raw data.  Includes
documentation of data reorganization steps, either in the form of files (R
notebooks, Excel files, etc.) that embody data transformations, or via another
README.txt file. - Analysis.  Contains one or more R Notebooks proceeding
through the data analysis steps. - Graphics.  Contains R Notebooks stepping
through development of related graphics, and also raw copies of resulting
graphics, usually in \*.png and \*.pdf formats.  These graphics may differ from
graphics as they appear in final State of the Bay graphical layouts.

# Summary of Data Sources
Maine Board of Pesticides Control staff collected stormwater and sediment 
samples along the Coast of Maine in 2014 and 2015.  BPC Staff shared data with
CBEP directly, including sample locations, analytic results, and nominal 
laboratory detection limit.

Related data is presented and discussed in a BPC report to the Maine 
Legislature:

>  Maine Board of Pesticides Control.  2017.  Update to the Maine Board Of 
   Pesticides Control Assessment Relative to the Risks of Pesticides to Marine 
   Invertebrates. Report to the Maine Legislature.
   
The Report is available via teh CBEP Casco Bay Report Archive,
[here](https://www.cascobayestuary.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/BPC-2017-Risk-of-pesticides-to-marine-invertebrates-report.pdf).

## Sediment Sampling
BPC Staff conducted intertidal sediment sampling at 20 locations along the Coast
of Maine in 2014. In 2015 Samples were collected specifically in Casco Bay.  The
sampling locations in 2015 included heavily populated shorelines as well as
shorelines of unpopulated islands. Sediment samples were analyzed for a limited
number of pesticides and pesticide constituents, principally pyrethroids.

There were too few stormwater samples collected from within Casco Bay to draw 
strong conclusions, so related stormwater data are not analyzed here.
